@cindex license of GSL
@cindex GNU General Public License
The GNU Scientific Library (GSL) is a collection of routines for
numerical computing.  The routines have been written from scratch in C,
and are meant to present a modern Applications Programming Interface
(API) for C programmers, while allowing wrappers to be written for very
high level languages.  The source code is distributed under the GNU
General Public License.

@comment GSL is currently in beta-test release, for people who want to test the
@comment library itself. When the library is complete and fully tested it will be
@comment announced for general use.

@menu
* Routines available in GSL::   
* GSL is Free Software::        
* Obtaining GSL::               
* An Example Program::          
* No Warranty::                 
* Further Information::         
@end menu

@node Routines available in GSL
@section Routines available in GSL

The library covers a wide range of topics in numerical computing.
Routines are available for the following areas,

@multitable @columnfractions 0.05 0.45 0.45 0.05
@item @tab Complex Numbers            @tab Roots of Polynomials        
@item @tab Special Functions          @tab Vectors and Matrices        
@item @tab Permutations               @tab Sorting                    
@item @tab BLAS Support               @tab Linear Algebra              
@item @tab Eigensystems               @tab Fast Fourier Transforms    
@item @tab Quadrature                 @tab Random Numbers    
@item @tab Quasi-Random Sequences     @tab Random Distributions 
@item @tab Statistics                 @tab Histograms                  
@item @tab N-Tuples                   @tab Monte Carlo Integration     
@item @tab Simulated Annealing        @tab Differential Equations  
@item @tab Interpolation              @tab Numerical Differentiation   
@item @tab Chebyshev Approximations   @tab Series Acceleration         
@item @tab Discrete Hankel Transforms @tab Root-Finding   
@item @tab Minimization               @tab Least-Squares Fitting          
@item @tab Physical Constants         @tab IEEE Floating-Point 
@end multitable
@noindent
The use of these routines is described in this manual.  Each chapter
provides detailed definitions of the functions, followed by example
programs and references to the articles on which the algorithms are
based.

@node GSL is Free Software
@section GSL is Free Software
@cindex free software, explanation of
The subroutines in the GNU Scientific Library are ``free software'';
this means that everyone is free to use them, and to redistribute them
in other free programs.  The library is not in the public domain; it is
copyrighted and there are conditions on its distribution.  These
conditions are designed to permit everything that a good cooperating
citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed is to try to prevent
others from further sharing any version of the software that they might
get from you.

Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give away
copies of any programs related to the GNU Scientific Library, that you
receive their source code or else can get it if you want it, that you
can change these programs or use pieces of them in new free programs,
and that you know you can do these things.  The library should not be
redistributed in proprietary programs.

To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute
copies of any related code, you must give the recipients all the rights
that you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get
the source code.  And you must tell them their rights. 

Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds
out that there is no warranty for the GNU Scientific Library.  If these
programs are modified by someone else and passed on, we want their
recipients to know that what they have is not what we distributed, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on our
reputation.

The precise conditions for the distribution of software related to the
GNU Scientific Library are found in the GNU General Public License
(@pxref{GNU General Public License}).  Further information about this
license is available from the GNU Project webpage @cite{Frequently Asked
Questions about the GNU GPL},

@itemize @asis
@item 
@url{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl-faq.html}
@end itemize


@node Obtaining GSL
@section Obtaining GSL
@cindex obtaining GSL
@cindex downloading GSL
@cindex mailing list for GSL announcements
@cindex gsl-announce mailing list
The source code for the library can be obtained in different ways, by
copying it from a friend, purchasing it on @sc{cdrom} or downloading it
from the internet. A list of public ftp servers which carry the source
code can be found on the development website,

@itemize @asis
@item 
@url{http://sources.redhat.com/gsl/}
@end itemize
@noindent
The preferred platform for the library is a GNU system, which
allows it to take advantage of additional features.  The library is
portable and compiles on most Unix platforms. It is also available for
Microsoft Windows.  Precompiled versions of the library can be purchased
from commercial redistributors listed on the website.

Announcements of new releases, updates and other relevant events are
made on the @code{gsl-announce} mailing list.  To subscribe to this
low-volume list, send an email of the following form,

@example
To: gsl-announce-request@@sources.redhat.com 
Subject: subscribe
@end example
@noindent
You will receive a response asking to you to reply in order to confirm
your subscription.

@node   An Example Program
@section An Example Program

The following short program demonstrates the use of the library by
computing the value of the Bessel function @math{J_0(x)} for @math{x=5},

@example
#include <stdio.h>
#include <gsl/gsl_sf_bessel.h>

int
main (void)
@{
  double x = 5.0;

  double y = gsl_sf_bessel_J0 (x);

  printf("J0(%g) = %.18e\n", x, y);

  return 0;
@}
@end example
@noindent
The output is shown below, and should be correct to double-precision
accuracy,

@example
J0(5) = -1.775967713143382920e-01
@end example
@noindent
The steps needed to compile programs which use the library are described
in the next chapter.

@node  No Warranty
@section No Warranty
@cindex warranty (none)
The software described in this manual has no warranty, it is provided
"as is".  It is your responsibility to validate the behavior of the
routines and their accuracy using the source code provided.  Consult the
GNU General Public license for further details (@pxref{GNU General
Public License}).

@node  Further Information,  , No Warranty, Introduction
@section Further Information
@cindex mailing list archives
@cindex website, developer information
@cindex contacting the GSL developers
Additional information, including online copies of this manual, links to
related projects, and mailing list archives are available from the
development website mentioned above.  The developers of the library can
be reached via the project's public mailing list,

@itemize @asis
@code{gsl-discuss@@sources.redhat.com}
@end itemize
@noindent
This mailing list can be used to report bugs or to ask questions not
covered by this manual.
