@cindex standards conformance, ANSI C
@cindex ANSI C, use of
@cindex C extensions, compatible use of
@cindex compatibility
This chapter describes how to compile programs that use GSL, and
introduces its conventions.  

@menu
* ANSI C Compliance::           
* Compiling and Linking::       
* Shared Libraries::            
* Autoconf macros::             
* Inline functions::            
* Long double::                 
* Portability functions::       
* Alternative optimized functions::  
* Support for different numeric types::  
* Compatibility with C++::      
* Aliasing of arrays::          
* Code Reuse::                  
@end menu

@node ANSI C Compliance
@section ANSI C Compliance

The library is written in ANSI C and is intended to conform to the ANSI
C standard.  It should be portable to any system with a working ANSI C
compiler.

The library does not rely on any non-ANSI extensions in the interface it
exports to the user.  Programs you write using GSL can be ANSI
compliant.  Extensions which can be used in a way compatible with pure
ANSI C are supported, however, via conditional compilation.  This allows
the library to take advantage of compiler extensions on those platforms
which support them.

When an ANSI C feature is known to be broken on a particular system the
library will exclude any related functions at compile-time.  This should
make it impossible to link a program that would use these functions and
give incorrect results.

To avoid namespace conflicts all exported function names and variables
have the prefix @code{gsl_}, while exported macros have the prefix
@code{GSL_}.

@node Compiling and Linking
@section Compiling and Linking
@cindex compiling programs, include paths
@cindex including GSL header files
@cindex header files, including
The library header files are installed in their own @file{gsl}
directory.  You should write any preprocessor include statements with a
@file{gsl/} directory prefix thus,

@example
#include <gsl/gsl_math.h>
@end example

@noindent
If the directory is not installed on the standard search path of your
compiler you will also need to provide its location to the preprocessor
as a command line flag.  The default location of the @file{gsl}
directory is @file{/usr/local/include/gsl}.

@cindex compiling programs, library paths
@cindex linking with GSL libraries
@cindex libraries, linking with
The library is installed as a single file, @file{libgsl.a}.  A shared
version of the library is also installed on systems that support shared
libraries.  The default location of these files is
@file{/usr/local/lib}.  To link against the library you need to specify
both the main library and a supporting @sc{cblas} library, which
provides standard basic linear algebra subroutines.  A suitable
@sc{cblas} implementation is provided in the library
@file{libgslcblas.a} if your system does not provide one.  The following
example shows how to link an application with the library,

@example
gcc app.o -lgsl -lgslcblas -lm
@end example
@noindent
The following command line shows how you would link the same application
with an alternative blas library called @file{libcblas},

@example
gcc app.o -lgsl -lcblas -lm
@end example
@noindent
For the best performance an optimized platform-specific @sc{cblas}
library should be used for @code{-lcblas}.  The library must conform to
the @sc{cblas} standard.  The @sc{atlas} package provides a portable
high-performance @sc{blas} library with a @sc{cblas} interface.  It is
free software and should be installed for any work requiring fast vector
and matrix operations.  The following command line will link with the
@sc{atlas} library and its @sc{cblas} interface,

@example
gcc app.o -lgsl -lcblas -latlas -lm
@end example
@noindent
For more information see @ref{BLAS Support}.

The program @code{gsl-config} provides information on the local version
of the library.  For example, the following command shows that the
library has been installed under the directory @file{/usr/local},

@example
bash$ gsl-config --prefix
/usr/local
@end example
@noindent
Further information is available using the command @code{gsl-config --help}.

@node Shared Libraries
@section Shared Libraries

To run a program linked with the shared version of the library it may be
necessary to define the shell variable @code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} to include
the directory where the library is installed.  For example,

@example
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH ./app
@end example
@noindent
To compile a statically linked version of the program instead, use the
@code{-static} flag in @code{gcc},

@example
gcc -static app.o -lgsl -lgslcblas -lm
@end example

@node Autoconf macros
@section Autoconf macros

For applications using @code{autoconf} the standard macro
@code{AC_CHECK_LIB} can be used to link with the library automatically
from a @code{configure} script.  The library itself depends on the
presence of a @sc{cblas} and math library as well, so these must also be
located before linking with the main @code{libgsl} file.  The following
commands should be placed in the @file{configure.in} file to perform
these tests,

@example
AC_CHECK_LIB(m,main)
AC_CHECK_LIB(gslcblas,main)
AC_CHECK_LIB(gsl,main)
@end example
@noindent
Assuming the libraries are found the output during the configure stage
looks like this,

@example
checking for main in -lm... yes
checking for main in -lgslcblas... yes
checking for main in -lgsl... yes
@end example
@noindent
If the library is found then the tests will define the macros
@code{HAVE_LIBGSL}, @code{HAVE_LIBGSLCBLAS}, @code{HAVE_LIBM} and add
the options @code{-lgsl -lgslcblas -lm} to the variable @code{LIBS}.

The tests above will find any version of the library.  They are suitable
for general use, where the versions of the functions are not important.
An alternative macro is available in the file @file{gsl.m4} to test for
a specific version of the library.  To use this macro simply add the
following line to your @file{configure.in} file instead of the tests
above:

@example
AM_PATH_GSL(GSL_VERSION,
           [action-if-found],
           [action-if-not-found])
@end example
@noindent
The argument @code{GSL_VERSION} should be the two or three digit
@sc{major.minor} or @sc{major.minor.micro} version number of the release
you require. A suitable choice for @code{action-if-not-found} is,

@example
AC_MSG_ERROR(could not find required version of GSL)
@end example
@noindent
Then you can add the variables @code{GSL_LIBS} and @code{GSL_CFLAGS} to
your Makefile.am files to obtain the correct compiler flags.
@code{GSL_LIBS} is equal to the output of the @code{gsl-config --libs}
command and @code{GSL_CFLAGS} is equal to @code{gsl-config --cflags}
command. For example,

@example
libgsdv_la_LDFLAGS =    \
        $(GTK_LIBDIR) \
        $(GTK_LIBS) -lgsdvgsl $(GSL_LIBS) -lgslcblas
@end example
@noindent
Note that the macro @code{AM_PATH_GSL} needs to use the C compiler so it
should appear in the @file{configure.in} file before the macro
@code{AC_LANG_CPLUSPLUS} for programs that use C++.

@node Inline functions
@section Inline functions

@cindex inline functions
@cindex HAVE_INLINE
@cindex autoconf, using with GSL
The @code{inline} keyword is not part of ANSI C and the library does not
export any inline function definitions by default. However, the library
provides optional inline versions of performance-critical functions by
conditional compilation.  The inline versions of these functions can be
included by defining the macro @code{HAVE_INLINE} when compiling an
application.

@example
gcc -c -DHAVE_INLINE app.c
@end example
@noindent
If you use @code{autoconf} this macro can be defined automatically.
The following test should be placed in your @file{configure.in} file,

@example
AC_C_INLINE

if test "$ac_cv_c_inline" != no ; then
  AC_DEFINE(HAVE_INLINE,1)
  AC_SUBST(HAVE_INLINE)
fi
@end example
@noindent
and the macro will then be defined in the compilation flags or by
including the file @file{config.h} before any library headers.  If you
do not define the macro @code{HAVE_INLINE} then the slower non-inlined
versions of the functions will be used instead.

Note that the actual usage of the inline keyword is @code{extern
inline}, which eliminates unnecessary function definitions in @sc{gcc}.
If the form @code{extern inline} causes problems with other compilers a
stricter autoconf test can be used, see @ref{Autoconf Macros}.

@node Long double
@section Long double
@cindex long double
The extended numerical type @code{long double} is part of the ANSI C
standard and should be available in every modern compiler.  However, the
precision of @code{long double} is platform dependent, and this should
be considered when using it.  The IEEE standard only specifies the
minimum precision of extended precision numbers, while the precision of
@code{double} is the same on all platforms.

In some system libraries the @code{stdio.h} formatted input/output
functions @code{printf} and @code{scanf} are not implemented correctly
for @code{long double}.  Undefined or incorrect results are avoided by
testing these functions during the @code{configure} stage of library
compilation and eliminating certain GSL functions which depend on them
if necessary.  The corresponding line in the @code{configure} output
looks like this,

@example
checking whether printf works with long double... no
@end example
@noindent
Consequently when @code{long double} formatted input/output does not
work on a given system it should be impossible to link a program which
uses GSL functions dependent on this.

If it is necessary to work on a system which does not support formatted
@code{long double} input/output then the options are to use binary
formats or to convert @code{long double} results into @code{double} for
reading and writing.

@node Portability functions
@section Portability functions

To help in writing portable applications GSL provides some
implementations of functions that are found in other libraries, such as
the BSD math library.  You can write your application to use the native
versions of these functions, and substitute the GSL versions via a
preprocessor macro if they are unavailable on another platform.  The
substitution can be made automatically if you use @code{autoconf}. For
example, to test whether the BSD function @code{hypot} is available you
can include the following line in the configure file @file{configure.in}
for your application,

@example
AC_CHECK_FUNCS(hypot)
@end example
@noindent
and place the following macro definitions in the file
@file{config.h.in},

@example
/* Substitute gsl_hypot for missing system hypot */

#ifndef HAVE_HYPOT
#define hypot gsl_hypot
#endif
@end example
@noindent
The application source files can then use the include command
@code{#include <config.h>} to substitute @code{gsl_hypot} for each
occurrence of @code{hypot} when @code{hypot} is not available.

In most circumstances the best strategy is to use the native versions of
these functions when available, and fall back to GSL versions otherwise,
since this allows your application to take advantage of any
platform-specific optimizations in the system library.  This is the
strategy used within GSL itself.

@node Alternative optimized functions
@section Alternative optimized functions

@cindex alternative optimized functions
@cindex optimized functions, alternatives
The main implementation of some functions in the library will not be
optimal on all architectures.  For example, there are several ways to
compute a Gaussian random variate and their relative speeds are
platform-dependent.  In cases like this the library provides alternate
implementations of these functions with the same interface.  If you
write your application using calls to the standard implementation you
can select an alternative version later via a preprocessor definition.
It is also possible to introduce your own optimized functions this way
while retaining portability.  The following lines demonstrate the use of
a platform-dependent choice of methods for sampling from the Gaussian
distribution,

@example
#ifdef SPARC
#define gsl_ran_gaussian gsl_ran_gaussian_ratio_method
#endif
#ifdef INTEL
#define gsl_ran_gaussian my_gaussian
#endif
@end example
@noindent
These lines would be placed in the configuration header file
@file{config.h} of the application, which should then be included by all
the source files.  Note that the alternative implementations will not
produce bit-for-bit identical results, and in the case of random number
distributions will produce an entirely different stream of random
variates.

@node Support for different numeric types
@section Support for different numeric types

Many functions in the library are defined for different numeric types.
This feature is implemented by varying the name of the function with a
type-related modifier --- a primitive form of C++ templates.  The
modifier is inserted into the function name after the initial module
prefix.  The following table shows the function names defined for all
the numeric types of an imaginary module @code{gsl_foo} with function
@code{fn},

@example
gsl_foo_fn               double        
gsl_foo_long_double_fn   long double   
gsl_foo_float_fn         float         
gsl_foo_long_fn          long          
gsl_foo_ulong_fn         unsigned long 
gsl_foo_int_fn           int           
gsl_foo_uint_fn          unsigned int  
gsl_foo_short_fn         short         
gsl_foo_ushort_fn        unsigned short
gsl_foo_char_fn          char          
gsl_foo_uchar_fn         unsigned char 
@end example
@noindent
The normal numeric precision @code{double} is considered the default and
does not require a suffix.  For example, the function
@code{gsl_stats_mean} computes the mean of double precision numbers,
while the function @code{gsl_stats_int_mean} computes the mean of
integers.

A corresponding scheme is used for library defined types, such as
@code{gsl_vector} and @code{gsl_matrix}.  In this case the modifier is
appended to the type name.  For example, if a module defines a new
type-dependent struct or typedef @code{gsl_foo} it is modified for other
types in the following way,

@example
gsl_foo                  double        
gsl_foo_long_double      long double   
gsl_foo_float            float         
gsl_foo_long             long          
gsl_foo_ulong            unsigned long 
gsl_foo_int              int           
gsl_foo_uint             unsigned int  
gsl_foo_short            short         
gsl_foo_ushort           unsigned short
gsl_foo_char             char          
gsl_foo_uchar            unsigned char 
@end example
@noindent
When a module contains type-dependent definitions the library provides
individual header files for each type.  The filenames are modified as
shown in the below.  For convenience the default header includes the
definitions for all the types.  To include only the double precision
header, or any other specific type, file use its individual filename.

@example
#include <gsl/gsl_foo.h>               All types
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_double.h>        double        
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_long_double.h>   long double   
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_float.h>         float         
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_long.h>          long          
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_ulong.h>         unsigned long 
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_int.h>           int           
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_uint.h>          unsigned int  
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_short.h>         short         
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_ushort.h>        unsigned short
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_char.h>          char          
#include <gsl/gsl_foo_uchar.h>         unsigned char 
@end example

@node Compatibility with C++
@section Compatibility with C++
@cindex C++, compatibility
The library header files automatically define functions to have
@code{extern "C"} linkage when included in C++ programs.


@node Aliasing of arrays
@section Aliasing of arrays
@cindex aliasing of arrays
The library assumes that arrays, vectors and matrices passed as
modifiable arguments are not aliased and do not overlap with each other.
This removes the need for the library to handle overlapping memory
regions as a special case, and allows additional optimizations to be
used.  If overlapping memory regions are passed as modifiable arguments
then the results of such functions will be undefined.  If the arguments
will not be modified (for example, if a function prototype declares them
as @code{const} arguments) then overlapping or aliased memory regions
can be safely used.

@node Code Reuse
@section Code Reuse
@cindex code reuse in applications
@cindex source code, reuse in applications
Where possible the routines in the library have been written to avoid
dependencies between modules and files.  This should make it possible to
extract individual functions for use in your own applications, without
needing to have the whole library installed.  You may need to define
certain macros such as @code{GSL_ERROR} and remove some @code{#include}
statements in order to compile the files as standalone units. Reuse of
the library code in this way is encouraged, subject to the terms of the
GNU General Public License.
